Rewritten for preview 4 to use the new resource model (#454)
dotnet/docs-aspire: docs/deployment/azure/application-insights.md

Author: App insights is only provisioned - there is no separate deployment for it- unlike say ACA where you provision the app but can deploy new containers. 

However we call the act of using Azd deployment in the other docs.

> Note: There is no automatic deletion of the Azure resources created this way, so you'll need to manually remove them when they are no longer needed.

To use automatic provisioning you will need to specify a dependency in the AppHost project, and reference it in each project/resource that needs to send telemetry to Application Insights. The steps include:

- Adding a Nuget package reference to `Aspire.Hosting.Azure.Provisioning` in the AppHost project. This will also implicitly include the `Aspire.Hosting.Azure` package.

- Add [app secrets](/aspnet/core/security/app-secrets) to tell it where to create the Application Insights Resource. If using Visual Studio, right click on the AppHost project and choose *Manage User Secrets* to create and open the secrets file. Add the following keys, replacing the values as applicable:

``` json
{

>   "Azure:Location": "WestUS",

Reviewer: nit:
```
"Azure": {
  "Location": "West US",
  "SubscriptionId": "__Replace with your subscription GUID__"
}
```

Author: Is this the id or the name of the region? We should be clear here.

Reviewer: Idk, I just used "West US 2" when I was trying earlier.

Author: who would know @davidfowl?

Reviewer 2: The location and subscription id pair are always:

- `Location`: A value from a result in this table, `az account list-locations -o table`. Best to use the `Name`, but I believe `DisplayName` works too.
- `SubscriptionId`: GUID for your sub.

var insights = builder.AddAzureApplicationInsights("MyApplicationInsights");

// Reference the resource from each project 
var apiService = builder.AddProject<Projects.aspire_app11_ApiService>("apiservice")
    .WithReference(insights);

builder.AddProject<Projects.aspire_app11_Web>("webfrontend")
    .WithReference(apiService)
    .WithReference(insights);

builder.Build().Run();
```

When you debug the application, Aspire will create the Application Insights resource on the first time that it sees the resource. The Application Insights Resource will feed the connection information to each project that references it. This can be seen as an `APPLICATIONINSIGHTS_CONNECTION_STRING` environment variable in the details view for the resource in the Aspire dashboard.

:::image type="content" source="../media/dashboard-with-connection-string.png" lightbox="../media/dashboard-with-connection-string.png" alt-text="Connection string environment variables in the Aspire dashboard":::

The settings for the created Application Insights resource will be persisted in the app secrets file.

### Provisioning Application insights at deployment time

> Using the Application Insights resource above will cause an Application Insights resource to be provisioned when the application is deployed using the Azure Developer CLI (AZD).

Author: This is difficult as azd does both a provision and deploy action. We have used the term deploy with AZD although that is actually a provision and deploy. I have tried to be clearer now.

```csharp
var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

builder.AddAzureProvisioning();

var insights = builder.AddConnectionString("myInsightsResource", "APPLICATIONINSIGHTS_CONNECTION_STRING");

var apiService = builder.AddProject<Projects.aspire_app11_ApiService>("apiservice")
    .WithReference(insights);

builder.AddProject<Projects.aspire_app11_Web>("webfrontend")
    .WithReference(apiService)
    .WithReference(insights);

builder.Build().Run();
```

#### Resource usage during developemnt

When running the Aspire application locally, the preceding code reads the connection string from configuration. As this is a secret we should store the value in [app secrets](/aspnet/core/security/app-secrets). Right click on the AppHost project and choose Manage Secrets from the context menu to open the secrets file for the AppHost project. In the file add the key and your specific connection string, the example below is for illustration purposes.

```json
{
  "ConnectionStrings": {
    "myInsightsResource": "InstrumentationKey=12345678-abcd-1234-abcd-1234abcd5678;IngestionEndpoint=https://westus3-1.in.applicationinsights.azure.com"
  }
}
```

> > Note: The keyname specified in the AppHost code needs to match a key inside the `ConnectionStrings` section in the settings file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> The `name` specified in the app host code needs to match a key inside the `ConnectionStrings` section in the settings file.
```

#### Resource usage during deployment

When [deploying an Aspire application with Azure Developer CLI (AZD)](./aca-deployment-azd-in-depth.md), it will recognize the connection string resource and prompt for a value. This enables a different resource to be used for the deployment from the value used for local development.

### Mixed deployment

> If you wish to use a different mechanism at developemnt from deployment, you can use a combination of Application Insights and Connection String resources, with a conditional. For example the following code uses an automatically provisioned resource at development time, and a pre-supplied connection at deployment time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you wish to use a different deployment mechanism per execution context, use the appropriate API conditionally. For example, the following code uses an automatically provisioned resource at development time, and a pre-supplied connection at deployment time.
```

```
var builder = DistributedApplication.CreateBuilder(args);

builder.AddAzureProvisioning();

> var insights = builder.ExecutionContext.IsPublishMode ?
>     builder.AddConnectionString("ai", "APPLICATIONINSIGHTS_CONNECTION_STRING") :
>     builder.AddAzureApplicationInsights("ai");

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
var insights = builder.ExecutionContext.IsPublishMode
    ? builder.AddConnectionString("ai", "APPLICATIONINSIGHTS_CONNECTION_STRING")
    : builder.AddAzureApplicationInsights("ai");
```

var apiService = builder.AddProject<Projects.aspire_app11_ApiService>("apiservice")
    .WithReference(insights);

builder.AddProject<Projects.aspire_app11_Web>("webfrontend")
    .WithReference(apiService)
    .WithReference(insights);

builder.Build().Run();
```

> > Note: With the above you will need to supply the `Azure:Location` and `Azure:Subscription` information in app secrets for development time usage, and will be prompted for the connection string by AZD at deployment time.

Reviewer 2: Please confirm my suggested change here, it's `Azure:SubscriptionId`, right? And not `Azure:Subscription`.

```suggestion
> [!TIP]
> The preceding code requires you to supply the `Azure:Location` and `Azure:SubscriptionId` information in app secrets for development time usage, and will be prompted for the connection string by AZD at deployment time.
```

    // Uncomment the following lines to enable the Azure Monitor exporter 

>     // (requires the Azure.Monitor.OpenTelemetry.Exporter package)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // (requires the Azure.Monitor.OpenTelemetry.AspNetCore package)
```
